Communication.

I've been learning Ukrainian off and on for about 2 years. I started off my learning journey as most people do nowadays with Duolingo. I made some progress of course as is to be expected. I picked up some vocabulary, I picked up a few phrases. All in all I probably spent ~400 hours on the platform. But when, I tried interacting with Ukrainians via Twitter or even just reading their posts I learned just how little I "learned." Sure, I could recognize some words and maybe get a *very* rough idea of what was being said, but it was nowhere close to fluency.

Well, roughly 6 months ago I decided I needed someone to practice with. I found a language exchange partner through Reddit and it's going very well! I'm able to understand so much more and my actual spoken language is improving so much faster. So what changed? Luckily for me my language exchange partner has already basically mastered English. In my opinion, moreso than even some "native" speakers I interact with :)

During our conversations she introduced me to a lot of ideas she's put into practice. But her main obsession is "Comprehensible Input"(CI) coined by the linguist Stephen Krashen. It's part of his "Input hypothesis." The basic idea as she explained to me is that the best way to learn is to absorb CI through interesting and appropriate material. Learning will come with time, repeated exposure, and eventually being able to learn new concepts from context. There is a sort of "chicken and egg" problem here when you look at this idea from what the most common approaches are to language learning. How can you learn anything if your basis is nothing?

That was a hard thing for me to stomach. For me my basis was nothing, but it seemed like this question made the whole theory unworkable in a way. However, there are various ways Krashen and others have explained how language acquisition works even when you know "nothing." There are various methods and the most interesting to me is [Total Physical Response (TPR)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Total_physical_response). There is a great video in which Krashen demonstrates this technique as he explains CI. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NiTsduRreug

This is all very interesting stuff and after a lot of thinking and initial skepticism I think it has a lot of merit and can give some good, if not the best, results in language learning. However, I'll stop myself here and say language *acquisition* as Krashen would say! So, I'm currently fully now in the process of "acquiring" Ukrainian through Comprehensible Input rather than simply "learning" it.

Working with my language partner we got into deep discussions about this topic, language acquisition in general, and lots of discussion about what certain words and phrases "mean." It's natural to try and explain these things through your native language. And it works in a large amount of cases, this explanation by *translation*. However, there are *many* cases in which translation just falls flat. There's even an entire online community dedicated to talking about *things* that can't be translated well between languages (https://www.reddit.com/r/DoesNotTranslate/).Even just between ourselves we ran into many cases of this as I was absorbing more Ukrainian. My initial idea was, well okay, can you explain these words or phrases to me with examples? In retrospect this is sort of like the TPR method in that I'm looking to ground these words and phrases into something "real."

Thinking on all of this and all the discussions I've had the conclusion is simply that when you are acquiring another language, you're acquiring *that* language. Fluency in the practical sense means you are not doing any intermediate translation in your head between your target language and your already acquired language(s). There is this idea of "mentalese" that comes from the Language of thought Hypothesis (LOTH)(https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/language-thought/). In this framework, mentalese is the basis of which we layer upon human language. Between human languages there are generally some mappings from language to language, but they're never exact. Even between speakers of the same language there can be enough differences that concepts one person is expressing with language they have acquired or created can't be initially understood by another speaker and translation to a "common" form of the language makes these new concepts lose some of their nuance. As a great example, just think of the woeful state of a lot of scientific journalism which can even begin to give its readers completely conflicting information from what is stated in the original research!

With all of this being said, simply *translation* leaves a lot to be desired and it's not the proper way in which to deal with radical novelties as Edsger Dijkstra called them. (https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD10xx/EWD1036.html)


>Coping with radical novelty requires an orthogonal method. One must consider one's own past, the experiences collected, and the habits formed in it as an unfortunate accident of history, and one has to approach the radical novelty with a blank mind, consciously refusing to try to link it with what is already familiar, because the familiar is hopelessly inadequate. One has, with initially a kind of split personality, to come to grips with a radical novelty as a dissociated topic in its own right. Coming to grips with a radical novelty amounts to creating and learning a new foreign language that can not be translated into one's mother tongue.


Analogy and metaphor are important tools. However by nature of being approximations they simply fall short of giving the full experience of comprehending new concepts as they are and not simply as the imitations they're purported to be.

In terms of radical novelties it seems to me that acquiring a second language is a process of not acquiring just vocabulary, grammar, etc. But also acquiring the cultural context of how concepts are linked together. A new language itself is a radical novelty because it is another way of thinking. There are two very simple examples from Ukrainian that come to mind immediately. The first is how a Ukrainian speaker thinks when asking "What is your name?" To most English speakers this is what our minds would go to. However, in Ukrainian the phrase is closer to "What are you called?" or "Як вас звати?" The literal translation is "How you called?" Interestingly, a Ukrainian speaker who was practicing their English with me started the conversation with "How can I call you?". The second example is in a phrase lots of newer English speakers will use when coming from Ukrainian. "My english is 50/50". It's a very strange phrase, it makes "sense" but it doesn't sound completely native. In a sense English speakers may translate in their minds to something such as "so-so". But, it can mean much more than that. In Ukrainian there is a word "середньо." It *roughly* can be translate as middle, average, or normal. This can sometimes lead to very strange constructions to native speakers. For example:

> "Як сьогодні погода? Холодно?" (How today weather? Cold?)


> "Середньо" (Middle/average/normal/not hot or cold)

When bringing this to English a Ukrainian speaker may very well say the weather is "50/50"! But, stranger still is that "50/50" coming from a Ukrainian context loses a nuance in English where it can be applied to the idea of probability of things happening. And if you are an English speaker going to Ukrainian you would not use Середньо to say that something has a 50/50 chance of happening. At least as far as I know :)

All of this leads me to the main topic I wanted to write about. What I'm seeing is that there are a few critical concepts that are applicable to language acquisition and more generally, communication. It seems to me the crux of communication is the consumption, acquisition, of concepts as they are and how they're related in the "language" being acquired. There are very simple methods such as TPR that can ground this language acquisition process in things that all humans are familiar with, our reality. Even more abstract concepts such as "hunger" or "depression" which can't be demonstrated as easily in a TPR style method are learned through a shared common ground between humans. And are probably, in my opinion, acquired via empathy.

Unfortunately, I have a background in computer science and some fluency with programming. So in typical programmer fashion I began to think about what "nails" I could begin to hit with my new found "hammer." A natural topic for me to gravitate towards was APIs. I asked myself a simple question: "Would it be possible to take ideas from CI and methods like TPR in order to facilitate two programs being able to automatically communicate with each other?" The motivation is simply because APIs and REST or GraphQL APIs in particular take a sizeable amount of time to create, document, and use.

What are we doing as programmers when we create and use APIs? At the heart of it we're trying to create a common ground between to applications so that they can communicate and perform additional functions that they wouldn't be able to carry out otherwise. How often do our simple programs begin to mimic in their internal logic all of the logic of external programs no matter how clean the API is between them? It's unavoidable that when you're dealing with how another program has organized its data that you must necessarily begin to implement logic that conforms to that organization. As soon as you start ingesting information from another source it forces the logic of your program to deal with these new foreign concepts.

So how can two programs communicate? They acquire parts of each other. Right now this acquisition is facilitated by humans, but is that even necessary? Is it possible to write code in isolation and have your program communicate automatically to fill in the gaps? It just leads to more questions. My main questions are:

1. Is there a mentalese that programs share that can be the basis of interprogram communication? The first thought to jump to, and it's an easy one, is just "Turing Machines." Programs operate within very defined theoretical boundaries.
2. Is it possible to bootstrap communication between two programs for a higher level of communication? Possibly, but I think it would require (at least for now) some sort of human equivalent of the theoretical "language acquisition device."(LAD) How this would be implemented in practice is an even harder question.
3. Is this even practical? Well, I have an academic bent in my soul. So, I really don't care :) I'm only really concerned if it's possible. And it would be nice if it was also able to be realized or even further realized "efficiently"(whatever efficiently means).

I've had further discussions on this with friends and I can't remember all of the discussions but this all leads to the main task at hand currently. Laying the foundations for a software equivalent of a LAD. And then further making it possible for two programs, dealing with separate problem spaces to be able to "acquire" each other in the sense of creating further functionality in one or both of them to further expand what problems they're able to solve in their respective domains.





